.csv
====

.csv is the abbreviation for Comma Separated Values. It is an open,
plain text spreadsheet format. Since the .csv format is a plain text
itself, it is possible to use a spreadsheet program or even a text
editor to edit the .csv file.

Krita supports the .csv version used by TVPaint, to transfer layered
animation between these two softwares and probably with others, like
Blender. This is not an image sequence format, so use the document
loading and saving functions in Krita instead of the “import animation
sequence” and “export animation” menu items.

The format consists of a text file with .csv extension, together with a
folder under the same name and a .frames extension. The .csv file and
the folder must be on the same path location. The text file contains the
parameters for the scene, like the field resolution and frame rate, and
also contains the exposure sheet for the layers. The folder contains
:doc:`.png` picture files. Unlike image sequences, a key frame
instance is only a single file and the exposure sheet links it to one or
more frames on the timeline.

.. figure:: images/csv/Csv_spreadsheet.png
   :alt: images/csv/Csv_spreadsheet.png
   :align: center

   A .csv file as a spreadsheet in *LibreOffice Calc*

Krita can both export and import this format. It is recommended to use
8bit sRGB colour space because that's the only colour space for TVPaint.
Layer groups and layer masks are also not supported.

TVPaint can only export this format by itself. In TVPaint 11, use the
“Export to...” option of the “File” menu, and on the upcoming “Export
footage” window, use the “Clip: Layers structure” tab.

.. figure:: images/csv/Csv_tvp_csvexport.png
   :alt: images/csv/Csv_tvp_csvexport.png
   :align: center

   Exporting into .csv in TVPaint

To import this format back into TVPaint there is a George language
script extension. See the “Packs, Plugins, Third party” section on the
TVPaint community forum for more details and also if you need support
for other softwares. Moho/Anime Studio and Blender also have plugins to
import this format.

.csv import script for TVPaint:
`http://forum.tvpaint.com/viewtopic.php?f=26&t=9759 <http://forum.tvpaint.com/viewtopic.php?f=26&t=9759>`__

.csv import script for Moho/Anime Studio:
`http://forum.tvpaint.com/viewtopic.php?f=26&t=10050 <http://forum.tvpaint.com/viewtopic.php?f=26&t=10050>`__

.csv import script for Blender:
`https://developer.blender.org/T47462 <https://developer.blender.org/T47462>`__

