.psd
====

.psd is Photoshop's internal file format. For some reason, people like
to use it as an interchange format, even though it is not designed for
this.

.psd, unlike actual interchange formats like :doc:`.pdf`,
:doc:`.tiff`, :doc:`.exr`, :doc:`.ora` and
:doc:`.svg` doesn't have an official spec online. Which means
that it needs to be reverse engineered. Furthermore, as an internal file
format, it doesn't have much of a philosophy to it's structure, as it's
only purpose is to save what photoshop is busy with, or rather, what all
the past versions of photoshop have been busy with. This means that the
inside of a psd looks somewhat like photoshop's virtual brains, and psd
is in general a very disliked file-format.

Due to \*.psd being used as an interchange format, this leads to
confusion amongst people using these programs, as to why not all
programs support opening these. Sometimes, you might even see users
saying that a certain program is terrible because it doesn't support
opening psds properly. But as psd is an internal file-format without
online specs, it is impossible to have any program outside it support it
100%.

Krita supports loading and saving raster layers, blending modes,
layerstyles, layer groups, and transparency masks from psd. It will
likely never support vector and text layers, as these are just too
difficult to program properly.

We recommend using any other file format instead of psd if possible,
with a strong preference towards :doc:`.ora` or :doc:`.tiff`.

As a working file format, psds can be expected to become very heavy and
most websites won't accept them.

